docs/flows.md, before:

# TranslationZed-Py — Key Flows
_Last updated: 2026-01-27_

---

## 1) Startup EN Hash Check

```
App start
  -> load .tzp-cache/en.hashes.bin
  -> hash EN files (raw bytes)
  -> if mismatch:
       show dialog "English source changed"
       -> Acknowledge & Reset: rewrite EN hash index
       -> Cancel: abort startup
```

---

## 2) Open Project + Select Locales

```
User: Project ▸ Open
  -> directory picker
  -> scan locales (ignore _TVRADIO_TRANSLATIONS)
  -> read language.txt (charset + display name)
  -> show checkbox chooser (EN hidden)
  -> user selects locales
  -> build tree with multiple roots (one per locale)
  -> open first file in table
```

---

## 3) Edit + Save (single file)

```
User edits cell
  -> update Entry value + status
  -> write .tzp-cache/<locale>/<rel>.bin (status + draft value)
  -> add dirty dot (●) in tree if value changed

User: Save
  -> prompt Write / Cache only / Cancel
  -> Cache only: keep drafts in cache; originals unchanged
  -> Write:
       saver preserves concat structure + trivia
       write file.tmp -> replace
       write .tzp-cache/<locale>/<rel>.bin (status only)
       remove dirty dot (●)
```

---

## 4) Status Update

```
User: Status ▼ or Ctrl+P
  -> set Entry.status
  -> repaint row (color)
  -> update Status ▼ label to selected row status
```

---

## 5) Locale Switch

```
User: Project ▸ Switch Locale(s)
  -> auto-write cache for current file (no prompt)
  -> re-run locale chooser (checkboxes)
  -> rebuild tree (multiple roots)
  -> open first file
```

Commit message:

Codex: save-all prompt lists draft files
- avoid creating empty cache folders when no drafts/statuses exist
- add scrollable save prompt listing files to write
- restore Ctrl+S save-all across cached drafts
- update cache-write semantics in docs and tests

docs/flows.md, after:

# TranslationZed-Py — Key Flows
_Last updated: 2026-01-27_

---

## 1) Startup EN Hash Check

```
App start
  -> load .tzp-cache/en.hashes.bin
  -> hash EN files (raw bytes)
  -> if mismatch:
       show dialog "English source changed"
       -> Acknowledge & Reset: rewrite EN hash index
       -> Cancel: abort startup
```

---

## 2) Open Project + Select Locales

```
User: Project ▸ Open
  -> directory picker
  -> scan locales (ignore _TVRADIO_TRANSLATIONS)
  -> read language.txt (charset + display name)
  -> show checkbox chooser (EN hidden)
  -> user selects locales
  -> build tree with multiple roots (one per locale)
  -> open first file in table
```

---

## 3) Edit + Save (single file)

```
User edits cell
  -> update Entry value + status
  -> write .tzp-cache/<locale>/<rel>.bin (status + draft value)
  -> add dirty dot (●) in tree if value changed

User: Save
  -> prompt Write / Cache only / Cancel
  -> prompt shows a scrollable list of files to be written
  -> Cache only: keep drafts in cache; originals unchanged
  -> Write:
       saver preserves concat structure + trivia
       write file.tmp -> replace
       write .tzp-cache/<locale>/<rel>.bin (status only)
       remove dirty dot (●)
```

---

## 4) Status Update

```
User: Status ▼ or Ctrl+P
  -> set Entry.status
  -> repaint row (color)
  -> update Status ▼ label to selected row status
```

---

## 5) Locale Switch

```
User: Project ▸ Switch Locale(s)
  -> auto-write cache for current file (no prompt)
  -> re-run locale chooser (checkboxes)
  -> rebuild tree (multiple roots)
  -> open first file
```
